---
layout: post
title:  "The Development of Freud's Concept of Masochism"
date:   2017-12-08 14:03:26 -0400
categories: research
---
            
<em><!--excerpt.start-->Submitted to APsaA</em>

Commonly defined as pleasure derived from suffering, masochism has in fact undergone several rounds of revision in Freud’s early studies. Emerging from a perverse, gender-specific notion, it will later acquire a broader significance in relation to the death drive and other basic instincts in Freud’s later writings. This essay will trace the desexualization and depathologization of masochism in three texts, The Wolf Man (1918), A Child in Being Beaten (1920), and Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920). A clinical manifestation of this kind is first called by its name in The Wolf Man, where it is treated as a form of sexual perversion: the boy fantasizes about copulating with or being beaten on the genitals by the father, through which he learns to desire the passive role and experiences pain as pleasure. The first part of my essay will situate the birth of masochism in this text. I will argue that, framed in terms of femininity and the fear of castration, masochism is ultimately a product of the analyst’s misogynist lens on pleasure and sexuality. Being a woman is, at this stage of analysis, synonymous with being passive and pain-loving. This construct is mirrored in the male masochist as the reasoning, I don’t want to be castrated, so I will punish any act that makes me passive or womanly, even if it means inflicting pain on myself.



